272-[DF]-Lab: Working with Functions
Scenario
The database operations team has created a relational database named world containing three tables: city, country, and countrylanguage. This lab involves writing SQL queries using database functions with the SELECT statement and WHERE clause to address specific use cases.
Lab Overview and Objectives
This lab demonstrates how to use common database functions with the SELECT statement and WHERE clause. After completing this lab, you will be able to:

Use aggregate functions SUM(), MIN(), MAX(), and AVG() to summarize data.
Use the SUBSTRING_INDEX() function to split strings.
Use the LENGTH() and TRIM() functions to determine the length of a string.
Use the DISTINCT() function to filter duplicate records.
Use functions in the SELECT statement and WHERE clause.

Duration: Approximately 45 minutes
Data Source: Sample data is taken from Statistics Finland, general regional statistics, February 4, 2022.
AWS Service Restrictions
In this lab environment, access to AWS services and actions is restricted to those required to complete the lab instructions. Attempting to access other services or perform unauthorized actions may result in errors.
Accessing the AWS Management Console

At the upper-right corner of the instructions, choose Start Lab.
Troubleshooting: If you encounter an "Access Denied" error, close the error box and choose Start Lab again.


Check the lab status:
Red circle: Lab has not started.
Yellow circle: Lab is starting.
Green circle: Lab is ready.Wait for the green circle before proceeding.


Choose the green circle next to AWS to open the AWS Management Console in a new browser tab. You will be automatically signed in.
Tip: If the tab doesn’t open, check for a browser banner or icon indicating blocked pop-ups. Allow pop-ups for the site.


Arrange the AWS Management Console tab alongside the instructions for easier reference.

Note: Do not change the lab Region unless instructed.
Task 1: Connect to the Command Host
In this task, you connect to an EC2 instance (Command Host) containing a database client to access the database.

In the AWS Management Console, navigate to Services > Compute > EC2.
In the navigation pane, select Instances.
Select the checkbox next to the instance labeled Command Host, then choose Connect.
Note: If the Command Host is not visible, the lab may still be provisioning, or you may be in the wrong Region.


On the Connect to instance page, select the Session Manager tab and choose Connect to open a terminal window.
Note: If the Connect button is unavailable, wait a few minutes and try again.


Configure the terminal to access required tools and resources by running:sudo su
cd /home/ec2-user/


Tip for Windows users: Use Shift+Ctrl+V to paste commands in the Session Manager terminal.


Connect to the database server using the following command:mysql -u root --password='re:5tart:9'


Reconnection Tip: If the Session Manager window becomes unresponsive, close it, reconnect using the above steps, and rerun the commands.



Task 2: Query the World Database
In this task, you query the world database using SELECT statements and database functions to process and manipulate data.

Display the existing databases:SHOW DATABASES;

Verify that the world database is available. If not, contact your instructor.
Review the schema, data, and row count of the country table:SELECT * FROM world.country;


Use aggregate functions to summarize data from the country table:SELECT SUM(Population), AVG(Population), MAX(Population), MIN(Population), COUNT(Population) FROM world.country;


SUM(): Adds all population values.
AVG(): Calculates the average population.
MAX(): Finds the highest population value.
MIN(): Finds the lowest population value.
COUNT(): Counts rows with a population value.


Split a string using SUBSTRING_INDEX():SELECT Region, SUBSTRING_INDEX(Region, ' ', 1) FROM world.country;

The second column returns the first part of each region name before a space.
Filter records with “Southern” in the first part of the region name:SELECT Name, Region FROM world.country WHERE SUBSTRING_INDEX(Region, ' ', 1) = 'Southern';


Use LENGTH() and TRIM() to find regions with names shorter than 10 characters:SELECT Region FROM world.country WHERE LENGTH(TRIM(Region)) < 10;


Filter duplicate records using DISTINCT():SELECT DISTINCT(Region) FROM world.country WHERE LENGTH(TRIM(Region)) < 10;



Challenge
Write a query to return rows from the country table where the Region column is “Micronesia/Caribbean”. Split the region into two columns: Region Name 1 (Micronesia) and Region Name 2 (Caribbean).
Solution:
SELECT 
    Region,
    SUBSTRING_INDEX(Region, '/', 1) AS 'Region Name 1',
    SUBSTRING_INDEX(Region, '/', -1) AS 'Region Name 2'
FROM world.country
WHERE Region = 'Micronesia/Caribbean';

Conclusion
Congratulations! You have successfully:

Used aggregate functions SUM(), MIN(), MAX(), and AVG() to summarize data.
Used SUBSTRING_INDEX() to split strings.
Used LENGTH() and TRIM() to determine string length.
Used DISTINCT() to filter duplicate records.
Applied functions in SELECT statements and WHERE clauses.

Lab Completion

Choose End Lab at the top of the page and select Yes to confirm.
Verify the “Ended AWS Lab Successfully” message.
